gradio comparison blog (#2819)
huggingface/blog: why-gradio-stands-out.md

---
title: "17 Reasons Why Gradio Isn't Just Another UI Library"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/why-gradio-stands-out/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: ysharma
- user: abidlabs
---

# 17 Reasons Why Gradio Isn't Just Another UI Library

## **Introduction**

"Oh, Gradio? That's a Python library for building UIs, right?"

We hear this a lot, and while Gradio does let you create interactive UIs with minimal Python code, calling Gradio a "UI library" misses the bigger picture! Gradio is **more** than a UI library—it's a framework for **interacting with machine learning models** through both UIs and APIs, providing strong guarantees around performance, security, and responsiveness.

In this article, we'll introduce features that are unique to Gradio and explain how they are essential for building powerful AI applications. We'll share links to Gradio's official documentation and release notes, so you can explore further if you're curious.

> <img src="https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images/resolve/main/why-gradio-stands-out/gradio-comparison-chart.png" alt="Comparison of Gradio with other frameworks" />

Reviewer: image not found

- Automatic generation of REST API endpoints for each event defined in your Gradio app
- Automatically-generated API documentation, accessible through the "View API" link
- Client libraries with advanced features like file handling, Hugging Face Space duplication, and more

**Further Reading:** [Explore Client Libraries](https://www.gradio.app/guides/quickstart#the-gradio-python-and-java-script-ecosystem), [Querying Gradio Apps with Curl](https://www.gradio.app/guides/querying-gradio-apps-with-curl)

**What Sets Gradio Apart**:

- Most other Python frameworks lack official API access mechanisms
- While traditional web frameworks require separate implementations for UI and API endpoints, Gradio automatically generates both from a single implementation, including documentation.

### **2. Interactive API Recorder for Development**

Gradio's "API Recorder" was introduced in version 4.26. This powerful development tool enables developers to capture their UI interactions in real time and automatically generate corresponding API calls in Python or JavaScript.

- "API Recorder" can be found on the "View API" page discussed above.

> - It helps in documenting API usage of gradio applications through your own real examples

Reviewer: let's stick to a single convention around capitalization. There are some other places in the blog post where "gradio" is used instead of "Gradio" as well
```suggestion
- It helps in documenting API usage of Gradio applications through your own real examples
```

Author: Makes sense, fixed.

### **3. Fast ML Apps with Server-Side Rendering**

Gradio 5.0 introduced server-side rendering (SSR), changing how ML applications load and perform. While traditional UI frameworks rely on client-side rendering, Gradio's SSR:

- Eliminates the loading spinner and significantly reduces initial page load times
- Pre-renders the UI on the server, enabling immediate user interaction
- Improves SEO for published applications
- Gets automatically enabled for Hugging Face Spaces deployments while remaining configurable for local development

**Further Reading:** [Read more about Gradio 5's SSR](https://github.com/gradio-app/gradio/issues/9463#:~:text=Server)

**What Sets Gradio Apart:**

- Traditional Python UI frameworks are limited to client-side rendering while implementing SSR in JS web frameworks requires extensive full-stack development expertise
- Gradio delivers web framework-level performance while maintaining a pure Python development experience (Note: except for having to installing Node!)

### **4. Automatic Queue Management for ML Tasks**

> Gradio provides a sophisticated queuing system tailored for ML applications that handle both GPU-intensive computations and high-volume user access.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gradio provides a sophisticated queuing system tailored for ML applications that handles both GPU-intensive computations and high-volume user access.
```

- Gradio Components come with ML-specific UI choices, for example, we provide Undo/Retry/Like buttons for chat interfaces, ImageEditor and AnnotatedImage components for segmentation/masking use-cases, ImageSlider for image-to-image transformations, and so on
- Gradio has recently introduced enhanced UI features for Reasoning LLMs, Agents, Multistep Agents, Nested Thoughts, and Nested Agents within our chat interfaces, elevating AI Agents to a first-class status in the chat UI.

**Further Reading:** [Explore Gradio Themes](https://www.gradio.app/guides/themes), [See the UI Refresh](https://github.com/gradio-app/gradio/issues/9463), [Build UIs for Agents](https://www.gradio.app/guides/agents-and-tool-usage)

**What Sets Gradio Apart:**

- Other Python frameworks offer very limited color customization without comprehensive theming. You will have to implement theme management and CSS manually in all popular Web frameworks.
- With Gradio ML practitioners can create professional-looking applications without web design expertise while maintaining the flexibility to implement custom branding when needed.

### **9. Gradio's Dynamic Interfaces**

> The components and event listeners you define in gradio Blocks earlier were fixed—once the demo was launched, new components and listeners could not be added, and existing one could not be removed. But with `@gr.render` decorator, Gradio introduced the ability to change your UI dynamically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the introduction of the `@gr.render()` decorator, the components and event listeners you define in your Gradio application are no longer fixed—you can add new components and listeners dynamically based on user interaction and state.
```

- You can now render UI modifications on-the-fly based on model outputs or your workflow.

> - Any Gradio Blocks can be imported and rendered inside another Blocks using the .render() method

Reviewer: This is a different use of `.render()` and unrelated
```suggestion
```

Author: I'd still like to keep this point because it is, 1) less known, and 2) very useful.

Maybe I can format it differently. Let me know if the change looks good to you.

**Further Reading:** [Read about recent innovations with Gradio 5](https://github.com/gradio-app/gradio/issues/9463), [Prototyping with Huggingface](https://www.gradio.app/guides/using-hugging-face-integrations) 

**What Sets Gradio Apart:**

- Most other Python frameworks would require a manual refresh for code updates while developing the app. The same goes for most Web frameworks—you need complex build pipelines and development servers.
- With AI Playground Gradio offers instant UI feedback and AI-assisted development. This focus on rapid development and AI-assisted tooling enables researchers and developers to create and modify ML applications quickly.

### **14. Hassle-Free App Sharing**

Once your Gradio app is ready, you can share it without worrying about deployment or hosting complexity. 

- You can generate an instant public URL by simply setting one parameter: `demo.launch(share=True)`. The application is accessible on a unique domain in the format `xxxxx.gradio.live` while keeping your code and model running in your local environment
- These share links have a 168-hour (1-week) timeout on Gradio's official share server

> - You can generate an instant public URL by simply setting one parameter: `demo.launch(share=True)` . The application is accessible on `*.gradio.live` domain for 72 hours

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can generate an instant public URL by simply setting one parameter: `demo.launch(share=True)` . The application is accessible on `*.gradio.live` domain for 1 week.
```

- The share link creates a secure TLS tunnel to your locally-running app through Gradio's share server using Fast Reverse Proxy (FRP)

> - For enterprise deployments or situations requiring custom domains or additional security measures, you can host your own FRP server to avoid the 72-hour timeout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For enterprise deployments or situations requiring custom domains or additional security measures, you can host your own FRP server to avoid the 1-week timeout
```
